feat: add `stats/base/ndarray/meankbn` (#8116)
stdlib-js/stdlib: lib/node_modules/@stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/meankbn/README.md

Reviewer: This README does not follow project conventions. See other packages.

Author: Resolved, PTAL.

See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

-->

# meankbn

> Compute the [arithmetic mean][arithmetic-mean] of a one-dimensional ndarray using the improved Kahan-Babuska algorithm.

<section class="intro">

The [arithmetic mean][arithmetic-mean] is defined as

<!-- <equation class="equation" label="eq:arithmetic_mean" align="center" raw="\mu = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i" alt="Equation for the arithmetic mean."> -->

```math
\mu = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i
```

<!-- <div class="equation" align="center" data-raw-text="\mu = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i" data-equation="eq:arithmetic_mean">
    <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/stdlib-js/stdlib@develop/lib/node_modules/%40stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/meankbn/docs/img/equation_arithmetic_mean.svg" alt="Equation for the arithmetic mean.">
    <br>
</div> -->

<!-- </equation> -->

This package provides an ndarray wrapper which maps a one-dimensional ndarray's buffer, length, stride, and offset into the corresponding strided kernel in [`@stdlib/stats/strided/meankbn`][@stdlib/stats/strided/meankbn].

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Author: Understood! :) Thank you!

</section>

<!-- /.intro -->

<section class="usage">

## Usage

```javascript
var meankbn = require(  '@stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/meankbn'  );
```

#### meankbn( arrays )

Computes the [arithmetic mean][arithmetic-mean] of a one-dimensional ndarray using the improved Kahan-Babuska algorithm.

> 

Reviewer 2: ````suggestion

```javascript
var ndarray = require( '@stdlib/ndarray/base/ctor' );

var xbuf = [ 1.0, 3.0, 4.0, 2.0 ];
var x = new ndarray( 'generic', xbuf, [ 4 ], [ 1 ], 0, 'row-major' );

var v = meankbn( [ x ] );
// returns 2.5
```

````

The function has the following parameters:

- **arrays**: array-like object containing a single input ndarray.

</section>

<!-- /.usage -->

<section class="notes">

## Notes

- If provided an empty ndarray, the function returns `NaN`.

</section>

<!-- /.notes -->

<section class="examples">

## Examples

<!-- eslint-disable no-console -->

```javascript
var discreteUniform = require( '@stdlib/random/array/discrete-uniform' );
var ndarray = require( '@stdlib/ndarray/base/ctor' );
var ndarray2array = require( '@stdlib/ndarray/to-array' );
var meankbn = require( '@stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/meankbn' );

var xbuf = discreteUniform( 10, -50, 50, {
    'dtype': 'float64'
});
var x = new ndarray( 'float64', xbuf, [ xbuf.length ], [ 1 ], 0, 'row-major' );
console.log( ndarray2array( x ) );

var v = meankbn( [ x ] );
console.log( v );
```

</section>

<!-- /.examples -->

<section class="related">

* * *

## See Also

> 
> - <span class="package-name">[`@stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/mean`][@stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/mean]</span><span class="delimiter">: </span><span class="description">compute the arithmetic mean of a one-dimensional ndarray.</span>
> - <span class="package-name">[`@stdlib/stats/strided/meankbn`][@stdlib/stats/strided/meankbn]</span><span class="delimiter">: </span><span class="description">compute the arithmetic mean using the improved Kahan-Babuska algorithm for strided arrays.</span>
> 
> </section>
> 
> <!-- /.related -->
> 
> <section class="links">
> 
> [arithmetic-mean]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_mean
> 
> [@stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/mean]: https://github.com/stdlib-js/stdlib/tree/develop/lib/node_modules/%40stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/mean
> 
> [@stdlib/stats/strided/meankbn]: https://github.com/stdlib-js/stdlib/tree/develop/lib/node_modules/%40stdlib/stats/strided/meankbn
> 
> </section>
> 
> <!-- /.links -->

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<!-- /.examples -->

<!-- Section for related `stdlib` packages. Do not manually edit this section, as it is automatically populated. -->

<section class="related">

</section>

<!-- /.related -->

<!-- Section for all links. Make sure to keep an empty line after the `section` element and another before the `/section` close. -->

<section class="links">

[arithmetic-mean]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arithmetic_mean

</section>

<!-- /.links -->
```

<!--

@license Apache-2.0

Copyright (c) 2025 The Stdlib Authors.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.

-->

> # @stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/meankbn

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# meankbn
```

<section class="intro">

The [arithmetic mean][arithmetic-mean] is defined as

<!-- <equation class="equation" label="eq:arithmetic_mean" align="center" raw="\mu = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i" alt="Equation for the arithmetic mean."> -->

```math
\mu = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i
```

<!-- <div class="equation" align="center" data-raw-text="\mu = \frac{1}{n} \sum_{i=0}^{n-1} x_i" data-equation="eq:arithmetic_mean">
    <img src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/gh/stdlib-js/stdlib@develop/lib/node_modules/%40stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/meankbn/docs/img/equation_arithmetic_mean.svg" alt="Equation for the arithmetic mean.">
    <br>
</div> -->

<!-- </equation> -->

This package provides an ndarray wrapper which maps a one-dimensional ndarray's buffer, length, stride, and offset into the corresponding strided kernel in [`@stdlib/stats/strided/meankbn`][@stdlib/stats/strided/meankbn].

</section>

<!-- /.intro -->

<section class="usage">

## Usage

```javascript
var ndarray = require( '@stdlib/ndarray/base/ctor' );
var Float64Array = require( '@stdlib/array/float64' );
var meankbn = require( '@stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/meankbn' );

> 
> var buf = new Float64Array( [ 1.0, 3.0, 4.0, 2.0 ] );
> var x = new ndarray( 'float64', buf, [ buf.length ], [ 1 ], 0, 'row-major' );
> 
> // ndarray variants accept an array-like of ndarrays:
> var v = meankbn( [ x ] );
> // returns 2.5

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
var meankbn = require(  '@stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/meankbn'  );
```

```

#### meankbn( arrays )

Computes the [arithmetic mean][arithmetic-mean] of a one-dimensional ndarray using the improved Kahan-Babuska algorithm.

The function has the following parameters:

> - **arrays**: array-like object containing a single input ndarray.
> 
> **Returns**: arithmetic mean as a `number`.
> 
> </section>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The function has the following parameters:

- **arrays**: array-like object containing a single input ndarray.

</section>
```

<!-- /.usage -->

<section class="notes">

## Notes

- If provided an empty ndarray, the function returns `NaN`.
- The wrapper supports non-unit and negative strides and non-zero offsets.

> - This package is a thin ndarray wrapper around [`@stdlib/stats/strided/meankbn`][@stdlib/stats/strided/meankbn]. Accuracy benefits come from compensated summation in the strided core.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

</section>

<!-- /.notes -->

<section class="examples">

## Examples

<!-- eslint-disable no-console -->

```javascript
'use strict';

var ndarray = require( '@stdlib/ndarray/base/ctor' );
var Float64Array = require( '@stdlib/array/float64' );
var meankbn = require( '@stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/meankbn' );

var buf = new Float64Array( [ 1.0, 3.0, 4.0, 2.0 ] );
var x = new ndarray( 'float64', buf, [ buf.length ], [ 1 ], 0, 'row-major' );

> console.log( meankbn( [ x ] ) );

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
var discreteUniform = require( '@stdlib/random/array/discrete-uniform' );
var ndarray = require( '@stdlib/ndarray/base/ctor' );
var ndarray2array = require( '@stdlib/ndarray/to-array' );
var meankbn = require( '@stdlib/stats/base/ndarray/meankbn' );

var xbuf = discreteUniform( 10, -50, 50, {
    'dtype': 'float64'
});
var x = new ndarray( 'float64', xbuf, [ xbuf.length ], [ 1 ], 0, 'row-major' );
console.log( ndarray2array( x ) );

var v = meankbn( [ x ] );
console.log( v );
```
